Rosanna: Your perspective is going to be different.
It has to be.
There are different things
that you need to do in order
to reach the same goal that you're sighted
counterpoint would achieve.
Doesn't mean that you can't.
You certainly can.
But you're going to need to do it
in a different way.
[music plays]
Rocky: People who are DeafBlind
have accomplished many, many things,
that sometimes gets overlooked.
Many of them work in various types
of occupations
and in various different ways.
Rosanna: Having a disability does not mean
that you can't be successful.
It's just the opposite.
It's okay to be different.
That's what makes me who I am.
That's what makes me, me.
And that's okay.
Rocky: We have the same goals,
the same interests,
the same attitudes, the same aptitudes,
and we want the same opportunities.
Given the opportunity and training,
an individual who is
DeafBlind can accomplish
just as much as someone
who is hearing-sighted.
Rosanna: What are the skills that you bring to
the job that you are looking for?
First of all, I think that's the first thing.
[music plays]
Isatou: I came to the
Helen Keller National Center
for a two-week summer program.
I was paired with a job coach.
The job coach teaches you
how to find a job,
how to answer interview questions,
how to get around on your job site,
how to advocate for yourself,
how to explain what your needs are
in terms of accommodations,
really a whole host of things.
We also created communication cards
so that I could talk with my co-workers.
James: This particular card allows me
to ask what you would like me to do next.
So when I'm at work,
I can figure out what my next task is.
This one says, “I'll be coming back to work
at 1:15 this afternoon, thank you.”
When I work at CVS and I'm busy,
if someone needs assistance,
I wear the receiver on my belt,
and one of the cashiers
will hold the transmitting button.
So they'll call me, it'll vibrate.
I'll know to go up to the cashier
and put something away.
If someone needs something found,
they can just buzz me
and I'll come up
and follow their direction.
I had a job coach and they trained me.
I would go once a week to work
and then it was increased
to two times a week.
I was getting close to the six-month mark
where I was going to be finished
with work, you know, my internship.
But CVS said, ‘you know what?
You're a great worker.
We really want to hire you.’
So then I started working six days a week.
I was doing so much work.
Isatou: The goal was to be
more independent.
I was pretty awkward in the beginning.
I was not really independent at the time.
They would accompany me
throughout the process.
Eventually we got to the point where I did
everything and I didn't really need
the job coach because I was able
to do everything on my own.
You know, they taught me
what I needed to know.
James: I feel like I'm on par
with my hearing peers, you know.
It's just like we're all workers
and it doesn't matter that I'm deaf.
I really like it.
And, you know, my self-confidence,
my self-esteem
has just gone through the roof
because I can.
Isatou: I became more self-sufficient.
I learned a lot from other people
and still did rely on people
in some instances.
I do feel like I rely on myself
more now than ever.
I don't really rely much on people anymore.
James: You can do anything.
It really is based on your attitude.
And you know, you have to have patience.
That's one problem.
You have to accept and have patience.
People have to understand
that it may take a little longer,
but we can do it.
[music plays]
Bien: It was a brief stint that I was here
and I only learned a couple of skills.
And then I went out on my own
and I worked at a place called Marshalls.
Initially, it was really awkward.
I mean, yes, it was the type of work
that I thought I wanted to do.
So I went in for the interview.
I did have an interpreter there
who explained
that I had Usher syndrome
and what that meant.
So the people at my workplace
had some training.
I think it was great that they did that
because everybody seemed really friendly
and all that awkwardness was sort of gone.
I worked there for six years and I was
sort of the master of everything there.
I knew how to do every job that was there.
I'm like, ”no worries, I can do this!”
I became sort of the trainer
of everybody for stock work.
You know, I was able to do
garment pressing
and I had to get up really early
to do that and I didn't care.
I was psyched
that this is what I got to do.
I got recognition for the work
that I was doing, I was so proud of it.
I got a certificate for being
a great employee and I loved working there
and I was earning my own money
and I was doing what I needed to do
to be independent
and living and work on my own.
Rosanna: Work on your skills.
Learn your skills, know who you are,
and know what your skills are in
related to the sighted world
and your sighted peers.
If you do that,
you will learn to be successful.
The tools are there.
You just need to access the tools
from your toolbox
and use them, and that would be
the advice that I would give.
If you need to use an interpreter,
use an interpreter.
If you need to use
large print, you can read
large print, use large print.
Whatever tools you have
that are going to be in your favor
to help you succeed, those are
the tools that you should access and use.
David: One of the things that is good
about disability is that it doesn't matter
what party you are, it doesn't matter
if you're rich or poor or
one color or the other
or one gender or the other.
None of that matters.
What matters is what can we do
to provide a reasonable modification
or a reasonable accommodation
to be able to get parity
so that people with disabilities
can participate in all aspects of life?
What public policies,
whether they be laws
or regulations can we put in place
to try to improve the condition
for people with disabilities?
Because if we improve the human condition
for people with disabilities,
we improve the human condition
for everybody.
The rising tide lifts all ships.
[music ends]